Using deep recurrent networks to detect gravitational inspiral events before they merge.  
Student:  Chiara lazzeri, Project Supervisor:  Dr.  Christopher Messenger  
  
Neural Networks have become a viable alternative to match filtering for gravitational waves detection,  as  they can achieve the  same level of sensitivity  but  are more computationallyefficient  [1].   The  scope  of  this  project  was  to  develop  a  recurrent  neural  network  for  thedetection of BBH merger signals.Unlike traditional feed-forward neural networks, a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) doesnot analyse all the data at once, but in sections.  Also, due to its internal memory, each ofits  outputs  depends  on  all  prior  inputs  [2].   The  network  developed  for  gravitation  wavedetection was modeled on a network designed for image classification.  It was trained with90K  template  waveforms  of  SNR  8,  each  1s  long,  consisting  of  either  a  signal  from  BBHmerger  with  Gaussian  noise  or  only  Gaussian  noise:  it  was  then  tested  on  20k  templatewaveforms.  As the network analyses a section of data at a time, a changing probability ofdetection can be obtained as the waveform goes through the network.  This can allow thesignal to be detected before the merger.  Once the RNN gave satisfying results with singlewaveforms, reaching 90% accuracy, it was applied to the analysis of longer sequences of data,containing both noise and a signal with noise.  This required a more complex network, whichwas implemented by stacking 4 Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) cells,  which are RNNcells with an additional long-term component which allows the analysis of longer strings ofdata.In conclusion, the project showed that recurrent neural networks are a viable option forgravitational  waves  detection  and  that  their  structure  allows  for  the  detection  of  signalsbefore merger.Figure 1:Plot showing the probability of detection changing as the 5 secondslong waveform is analysed by the network.  
  
References:  
[1] Gabbard, et al, Phys.  Rev.  Lett., 120, 141103 (2018).  
[2] Venkatachalam, 2019,Recurrent Neural Networks, last visited:  30/07/20,{https://towardsdatascience.com/recurrent-neural-networks-d4642c9bc7ce}
